Good morning, everybody.
I'm Doug Davidson,
and I'm here to talk to you about
internationalization in Cocoa.
Now, what is internationalization?
Probably everybody who's ever built
a Cocoa application has encountered
our model for localization,
single binary multiple localization,
where you have a single code
base and then multiple localized
versions of your resources for
each different localization.
And that's very important
for the user experience.
But internationalization is a somewhat
different and perhaps more subtle matter.
Internationalization covers making
sure that your application handles your
user's data in the manner they expect,
no matter what their language,
no matter which localization
they may be using,
even if your application
is never localized at all.
This is important.
Why should you be interested in this?
Because it's important for making
sure that your application is
suitable for a world-wide audience.
If you have international problems,
you could potentially cut
yourself off from a significant
portion of your audience.
Now we're going to talk about some of the
areas that are most important for this,
key event handling,
we'll talk about strings,
we'll talk about date
and time formatters,
and then we'll talk a bit about text.
Now, the fortunate thing here is that the
Cocoa frameworks try very hard to
make sure that everything is fully
internationalizable by default.
So in a certain sense,
all you have to do is not break that.
However, there are some assumptions
that are very easy to make,
particularly for someone like me.
I'm a native English speaker.
I came into this field a
long time ago before Unicode,
and ASCII was the hot new standard.
And so there are certain assumptions
that it's very easy to fall into
that cause real problems from
an international perspective.
And we've been dealing with
these issues for a long time,
and we've encountered
quite a few of these.
And so I decided to see how many
of these sorts of problems I could
fit into a single application.
Here's the application
that I came up with.
If we could go over to the demo machine.
[Transcript missing]
I know possibly not all of you have
had a chance to really work with
some of these complex input methods,
so I wanted to just give a really basic
demonstration of one of them to show,
I think this will help make clear
some of the issues involved here.
And the method I've chosen to use here is
is used for Chinese text.
And what the user does in this
particular method is to type in
a phonetic representation of the
character that they're interested in.
And then they hit space,
and they're presented with a
list of characters that they can
arrow through and choose from.
And then when they find the
character they really want,
they can hit return and select it.
And at that point,
it finally gets accepted and
entered into the text view.
The thing here is that there are lots
of keystrokes that are coming in that
are really intended for the input
method and not for the text view proper.
And if you intervene
at the keydown level,
you can interfere with this.
At worst, at best,
you're going to get a lot of spurious
keystrokes that you didn't want.
At worst, you can completely
break this input method.
And that's what this application
that I showed you does.
By overriding keydown and
swallowing these return characters,
it swallows the return character
that this input method wants
to accept the character.
And not all input methods are like this,
but this is fairly typical.
They can do almost
arbitrary key handling.
So let's go back to the slides.
Here we go.
I'm going to explain something
that you can do instead.
I talked about keystrokes that
are bound to particular methods.
What are these methods
that they're bound to?
They're mostly defined in NSResponder.
NSTextView is probably the class
that implements the most of these
various NSResponder methods.
There's a list of which keys
are bound to which methods.
These are methods of things
like insert new line,
insert tab, move left, right, up, down,
and so forth.
In particular,
the method that's bound to the
return key is insert new line.
How could I improve this little demo app?
Here's one example of
something you can do.
Instead of subclassing NSTextView,
we're acting as a TextView's
delegate and implementing
TextView do command by selector.
Then we look for this selector,
insert new line,
that indicates a return was pressed.
If we see it, we do something special.
In this case, we're returning no.
Returning no means the
TextView should go ahead and continue
handling this event normally.
If we return yes,
then that would mean we've
completely handled it and the
TextView shouldn't do its normal thing.
Okay, so now that you've got the
text into your application,
you probably want to
do something with it.
And to talk about string handling,
I brought in an expert, Mr.
Anna String himself, Akki Inoue.
Thank you, Doug.
Hi, I'm Aki Inoue.
I'd like to discuss string handling,
mainly focusing on pitfalls
you might stumble on.
These are the topics I'm covering today.
Let's get started with basics.
Cocoa provides rich string handling
capabilities via the NSString class.
NSString is the string object in Cocoa.
It's accepted virtually
anywhere from foundation class
to Android's book framework.
And it allows us to provide
efficiency both in API design
and performance point of view.
So you don't have to use different
string representation depending
on the framework you are using.
Also, Cocoa is designed to work
exclusively with UniCode standards,
and it also gives us coherent,
consistent, clear API.
So,
we don't have to do something like this.
The UniCode standard is the
industry standard character set.
It's used by all the
cool latest technologies.
And the latest version,
recently finalized version 5,
covers more than 99,000
characters from over 60 scripts.
A unique feature of UniCode standard
is it's not merely assigning
numeric values to each characters,
but it also defines rules and behaviors
dealing with those characters.
For example,
comparison or case mapping behaviors.
One of those rules is a
standard encoding form.
UniCode has
Three standard encoding
intervals defined:
UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32.
The numbers represent the bit width
of an atomic unit in the encoding.
For example, UTF-16 is a two byte entity,
just like Chopin.
And a string is conceptually
an array of UTF-16 characters,
and it provides various string-hunting
capabilities from comparison,
searching, so on and so forth.
And you could extend the capability
of NSString using one of companion
objects like NSCharacterSet,
NSAttributeString, or NSCannons.
Now we cover the basics.
I'd like to discuss HP Folds.
Now with the C-strings.
C-strings.
What is that?
Simply, it's this.
Now, what about it?
Probably,
this is one of the most familiar
C data type for most of you.
But I'd like to forget about it.
C-strings are mostly relying on some
implicit string encoding definition.
So,
It could be Mac Roman, UTF-8, Japanese,
or anything.
So at some point,
probably you are forced to guess
the encoding you are using with
some arbitrary C string pointers.
Another issue with
C-String is by using that,
you are unnecessarily limiting
the number of characters you can
represent in your application.
And if you want to have multi-lingual
capability in your application,
it's much,
much harder to keep track of each
encoding used in portions of C string.
Also,
In order to make sure your
application works with some arbitrary
encodings like Cyrillic or Arabic,
you have to probably test
your application with the 22
Mac OS encoding we are shipping.
So I know you might be tempted,
but stick with
NSString whenever possible.
It provides
Higher-level operation so you
don't have to access each of the
individual characters by yourselves.
And we consider the performance
of NSString pretty seriously.
And in fact, we know that NSString is one
of the most efficient Unicode
handling libraries in the industry.
And we keep track of the
change in UniCode standard.
So we're going to apply the
change whenever possible
to the major OS releases.
There are cases you might
still need to use C string.
These are the recommendations we have.
Always keep track of
the encoding explicitly.
So if you need to pass
around C string pointer,
we recommend to also pass around
corresponding encoding explicitly.
We have API to help you.
Another thing to note is if you
need to use one of POSIX-like API,
like Open System Code,
You need to use specialized
methods like file system
representation to get file system
compatible C string by the pointer.
And no,
we have already deprecated C string
method that use implicit encoding.
Now we cover the strings.
I'd like to mention case operations.
For English, lower casing,
upper casing is pretty simple,
one-to-one mapping.
[Transcript missing]
Case mapping operation being worked on.
So let me show some of the examples here.
The #s character in German language
only has lowercase representation.
So if you want to uppercase
the word like "Strauss" here,
the character that--
becomes two capital S characters,
thus changing the length of strength.
Another example.
It looks like two characters,
but actually, it's a ligature,
a single character looking
like two characters.
UniCode has those characters so
that in addition to lower case,
upper case, it needs to have title case.
So UniCode has three cases, not just two.
Another example,
you need to have the context in
order to do the correct mapping.
The Greek Sigma character,
the Greek capital Sigma character here,
requires a context in order
to get the correct mapping.
It could become lowercase
sigma character,
or it could be lowercase
final sigma form,
depending on its inward location.
Even innocent-looking
ASCII characters are not safe.
If you're in a lowercase,
the capital I character,
it's going to be a special dotless I if
you're writing in Turkish language.
So, casing operation is not a
simple one-to-one mapping.
It could change the length of string,
and often requires the
context of the whole string.
And surprisingly, lower casing and upper
casing is not symmetrical.
So,
You cannot expect a round-trip
fidelity between these operations.
And that caused interesting point that
if you want to have case insensitivity,
just by lower-casing and upper-casing
character doesn't give you that.
You have to have specific case
ins-- you need to use specific case
insensitive functionalities in NSString.
So if you want to do case operation,
we provide these methods,
uppercase string or lowercase string,
and capitalized string,
supporting the title case
we mentioned earlier.
So please don't look at individual
characters when you want to
change the case of string.
Next,
I'd like to cover character clusters.
Probably,
it's one of the biggest mysteries
in UniCode standards that multiple
characters could comprise a semantic,
grouped together character.
Next,
I'd like to cover character clusters.
Probably,
it's one of the biggest mysteries
in UniCode standards that multiple
characters could comprise a semantic,
grouped together character.
One of the common composition
is combining marks.
It's commonly used to
represent accent marks.
For example, this Gryff Alpha character
has three accents.
Thus, you can have six patterns to
represent this character in UniCode.
And the string handles all correctly
and recognizes them as equal.
So you don't have to worry,
but there are some exceptions.
is equal and hash do not take
composition difference into account.
So when you want to put
these strings into collection
classes such as NSDictionary,
you need to take extra steps beforehand.
So when you want to put
these strings into collection
classes such as NSDictionary,
you need to take extra steps beforehand.
From arbitrary composition
state string into free-composed
or free-decomposed string.
We recommend using the decomposed
string with canonical mapping for
compatibility with file system
and also efficiency reasons.
There are other types of compositions.
One is there are characters that can
actually combine arbitrary characters,
surrounding combining characters.
So you cannot expect that combining
only happens with the form of a
base character followed by accent.
Actually, you know,
a character could bind
any surrounding character.
Combining Graphium Joiner is one of them.
And another type of composition is Hangul
characters used in Korean language.
Each character could have at
least two representations,
combined or decomposed.
Yet another type of
composition is solid pairs.
Solid pairs are a combination
of two UTF-16 characters,
so it takes two slots inside a string.
They are used to represent characters
outside of 16-bit range by combining
those two 16-bit data into a 32-bit data.
[Transcript missing]
Beyond 60-bit ranges used by
customers in China and Japan.
So if you're planning
going to this market,
this is pretty essential to support.
Furthermore, the same combining behavior
I mentioned earlier applies to
the surrogate characters too.
So there are already characters
assigned in this area that can
combine with other characters.
In Unicode,
there are those types of composition, but
You can forget all the
details I mentioned today
if you stick with NSString.
NSString handles all
of them transparently.
If you need to process a
character cluster all by yourself,
you can use range of composed
character sequence app index.
The method maps character
index into a range of character
cluster containing the index.
You can process each TurkTurk cluster
from the beginning of the string,
like the code up here.
I'd like to mention source
file encodings here.
Xcode supports any type of encoding,
but we recommend keeping
your source code asking only.
For example, if you use Noasci byte
in NSString literals,
represented by a double-code format,
the behavior is simply undefined.
And often,
what you get is garbled text like
this in some other localization.
So if you need to embed some
NoSQL characters into your source code,
use one of those methods that takes
one of the Unicode encoding forms.
And if you have NoASCII characters,
and that can be visible to users,
the chances are you might want to
try the localized string facility
instead of trying to hard-code
NoASCII characters into your source code.
Some examples.
If you want to embed UTF characters
into your source code,
you can use simple C numeric values
instead of using the actual bytes inside
the source code and calling the UTF-8.
Another example.
This example,
we're using the %C format directive so
that you can include a UTF-16 character
like ellipsis here into your NSString.
I'd like to mention NS-attributed
string here a little.
If you are looking for some
string handling operation and
you can't find it in NS-string,
the chances are you can find it
in NS-attributed string instead.
For example, it can provide
Grammatical analysis like word
or line break information.
And also,
it's capable of reading and writing a
number of plain and rich text formats.
So you might just skip the headache of
dealing with plain text encoding issue
just by using NSF attribute string.
String Handling Wrap-up.
Cocoa provides string-rich
string handling.
And it's multilingual.
It makes your application world-ready,
transparent.
So by sticking to NSString,
It makes your application world-ready,
transparent.
So by sticking to NSString,
Now I'd like to bring
back Doug Davidson to talk
about locale and formatus.
Thank you.
Thanks, Akki.
So the next set of issues I want to
talk about have to do with locale.
What is locale?
Locale is not the same
thing as localization.
Localization refers to the
language that your application
uses to communicate with the user.
The locale has to do with the
user's preferences for how they want
their data organized and presented.
And the object that we use to
identify a locale is NSLocale.
And it has information about
things like choice of calendar,
date formats, time formats, sort orders,
English versus metric
measurement systems,
and so forth.
And you can use the class method
CurrentLocale to get the user's
CurrentLocale set of preferences.
And this may be one of the
predefined sets of formats,
or the user might have customized
it by choosing variations
for some of these items.
And in most cases, you're not going to be
using NSLocale directly.
You might probably use it
indirectly through a number of
locale-savvy classes like NSString,
NSNumberFormatter, NSDateFormatter,
and so forth.
And so let's talk about
NSNumberFormatter.
The most important thing for our number
formatting is to use NSNumberFormatter.
And NSNumberFormatter has
been around for a long time,
but it's only really been
fully locale savvy since 10.4.
So it has two different behaviors.
There's an older compatibility behavior,
and then there's the 10.4 behavior,
which is the one you want to use.
This is the default behavior for
applications that are linked on Leopard,
but if you're running back to Tiger,
you need to explicitly specify this,
and it's probably a good idea to do so.
And now, in the 10.4 behavior,
it still supports format strings,
but better than that,
the better thing to do is to use
one of the enumerated styles,
like decimal style, currency style,
and so forth,
because these are things that will
fully participate in the user's choice
of preferences for the format that
they want their numbers displayed in.
For NSDateFormatter,
it's somewhat similar.
Again, it's been around a long time,
but it's fully locale-savvy,
starting in 10.4,
and you want to use the 10.4 behavior.
And again, the best thing is to
use enumerated styles,
and for NSDateFormatter,
there are two sets of enumerated styles.
There's a date style and the time style,
and these have values like full, long,
medium, short,
or none if you want to have a date,
but not a time, or vice versa.
And these will fully participate
in the user's choice of preferences
for their display of dates.
We recommend against using
NSCalendarDate because,
again, this is an older class and
has the pre-10.4 behavior.
Another thing that people sometimes
do that we recommend against,
and that is using format strings
and making them localizable strings.
The problem there is that, as I said,
the localization is not
the same thing as locale.
For example,
many users around the world may
use the English localization,
not because it's not
their first language,
but it may be the second language
they're most comfortable with.
But they still will have their
own preferences and requirements,
indeed, for date format, time format.
They'll have their own data,
which is maybe in their own language
that they'll need handled properly.
If you need to do
calendrical calculations,
we have the class NSCalendar,
which handles a variety of different
calendars in use around the world.
And you can use the current
calendar method to get the
current user's preferred calendar.
Now, if you're using NSCalendar
for calendrical calculations,
it handles all these different
calendars in a sort of generalized way.
So you have to avoid making assumptions
that might be valid only for,
say, the Gregorian calendar.
They don't all have the same number
of days or months and so forth.
Years don't necessarily
start at the same point.
And again,
NSCalendarDate is an older class that
handles only the Gregorian calendar.
So I would like you to move
forward from that to NSCalendar.
sorting of strings.
Now,
the basic NSString compare method is a
default locale independent sort order.
It's useful for programmatic sorting.
If you are sorting data
to present to the user,
then you probably will want to use a
fully locale savvy comparison method.
We have some basic convenience ones,
localized compare,
localized case and sensitive compare.
Then we have the full options,
compare options range locale
into which you can pass
NSLocale current locales locale.
It's important to assume as little
as possible about what these
sort orderings are going to do.
The sort orderings can vary quite a bit,
not just with language,
but even in a writing system,
but from country to country within
the same language or writing system.
Different sort orders handle
things like accents differently.
Some of them sort them
with the base character,
some of them sort them separately.
Some of them will combine multiple
characters for purposes of sorting.
So you should assume as little as
possible about what they're going
to do and just let the comparison
method handle comparison for sorting.
So the little application I showed
you just used the standard obvious
compare method for sorting its strings.
But these were going to
be presented to the user,
so what we really want
is a locale-savvy sort,
case-insensitive in this case.
and that's the thing we prefer.
So the next thing that little sample
application did was to measure the
width of the words in the text.
And right away it runs into a problem.
So what does it do?
It asks the text view for its font,
and it goes through and finds each word,
and then it calls font width of string
string to get the width of that string.
Again, simple, obvious, and wrong.
The NSString method, no, excuse me,
the NS font method with
the string is deprecated,
and I want to explain why.
Most obvious is that
Given an arbitrary string,
it can be an arbitrary UniCode string,
and a single font is not going to
be able to represent any character
that might be in a string.
And in general,
the Cocoa text system is going to
substitute in a suitable font whenever
it finds a character that can't be
represented in a specified font.
So you can't necessarily just rely on
the font to measure a particular string.
But even more important from
an international perspective,
even if you know that the string can
be represented with a given font,
just adding up the width of
the glyphs in a string is not
sufficient to measure its width.
The glyphs will often have different
contextual forms depending on
where they appear and what the
characters around them are.
They may need to be reordered
depending on the writing system.
They may need to be repositioned.
So in general,
you need to have text layout in
order to properly measure text or
in order to properly display it.
Now, fortunately,
Cocoa has some simple convenience methods
that make it very easy to measure and
draw strings and attributed strings.
These are what we call the
string drawing methods,
things like NSString's
size with attributes,
where you specify an attribute
dictionary and get back size.
And there are various methods
for these for NSStrings or
NSTributed strings for sizing,
drawing at points and rects and so forth.
And you can look through
NSStringDrawing.h for these.
If you have needs that are more
complicated than these simple
convenience methods will handle,
then you can go to NSLayoutManager,
which gives you full control
over the layout process.
I'm going to talk about that in a minute.
So what should our little sample
application have been doing?
In this case,
we can use NSString's size with
attribute method as a drop-in
replacement for what it was doing.
In this case,
we create an attribute dictionary
with the font that we specify,
and we go through, and for each string,
we call sizeWithAttributes with that
attribute dictionary and get the width.
Okay, so I mentioned the use
of NSLayoutManager.
And this gives you a great
deal more control than these
simple convenience methods.
With NSLayoutManager,
you can get complete information
about the contents of the layout,
about all the glyphs and all
their positioning and so forth.
It also has a lot more options.
You can get complete
control over the process.
Now, you've probably used
NSLayoutManager already,
just not known about it.
NSLayoutManager normally is
part of the hidden machinery
that goes into NSTextView.
But if you need it,
if you need that sort of power,
then you can use it on its own.
So how do you get a layout manager?
Well, the simple and easiest method
is if you have a text view,
or if you create a text view,
then you automatically get all
the pieces of the Cocoa text
system provided for you.
And these are NSTextStorage,
which is the contents of the text,
the document, that is,
the characters and their attributes,
the fonts, and so forth.
NSTextContainer,
which describes the region within
which the text is to be laid out.
And then on the last, NSLayoutManager,
which is a central object that
manages everything and will give
you all the information you need.
If you don't want to have an
S-text view or if you want
to completely customize this,
then you can create all these
objects yourself and hook them up.
It's a few more lines of code.
Fortunately, we have some good examples,
such as the circle view example
that shows exactly how to do that.
So what does NS Layout Manager do?
The basic job of the Layout
Manager is to take the text,
that is, characters and their
attributes such as fonts,
as described by an attributed string,
that is a text storage,
and to convert them into a sequence
of glyphs and glyph positions.
What is a glyph?
A glyph is the fundamental displayable
element in a particular font.
It might be a letter, an accent,
or a ligature combining multiple letters.
So NS Layout Manager manages
the process of taking the text,
the characters and their attributes,
and converting them into
glyphs and their positions.
And it provides all
this information to you.
The most fundamental thing is
it provides the mapping from
the characters to the glyphs.
And in general, this is not necessarily
a one-to-one mapping.
In fact, it can be many-to-many.
A single character may require
multiple glyphs to represent it.
Or a set of characters may be
represented by a single glyph.
And Aslant Manager handles
all this for you.
It makes sure that the
mapping is always in order.
But in general, it's many-to-many.
And whenever you have
a range in the text,
you need to know whether you have a
range of characters or a range of glyphs.
And you use Aslant Manager to
convert back and forth between these.
And as I said,
NSLayoutManager also keeps track
of the positions of these glyphs
as they're laid out in the text.
And it will tell you, for example,
the size and position of any
particular line in the text.
And it will tell you the position of
any particular glyph within that line.
And the thing to remember here from an
international perspective is that the
ordering of glyphs within a line does
not necessarily bear any particular
relationship to the ordering of
the characters that generated them.
So some writing systems
write from left to right,
some of them write from right to left.
In some cases you will have text that
combines both of these in a single line.
So it may start out from one end and then
turn around and go the other direction.
So when you inquire of NS Layout
Manager about the positions of glyphs,
you just need to make sure that you
do not assume that the positions of
these glyphs are in any particular
order based on the ordering of the
characters that generated them.
So here's an example.
Here at the top, we have the characters.
We start off with some English,
and then we include some Arabic.
And the glyphs down at the bottom,
let me point out a couple
of things about these.
First of all, right here,
we have an FI ligature glyph.
That is two characters, F and I,
represented by a single glyph.
So right here, even in English,
we have an example of a situation where
the mapping between characters and
glyphs is not going to be one-to-one.
Then when we go over to the Arabic,
what happens is that these
Arabic characters at the
top are in logical order,
in the order they appear in the text,
but then when they're
going to be displayed,
their order will be from right
to left within this line.
So the positional ordering of
the glyphs is different from the
logical ordering of the characters.
And another thing to notice
is that these glyph forms,
as they appear in context here,
are quite a bit different from
the context-independent appearance
that I've shown up at the top.
So these glyphs change shape depending
on where they appear in a word.
NSLayoutManager also provides
some higher level information.
Things like you can go from ranges
of characters and glyphs in the
text to rects within the layout.
And here again,
the thing to remember is that
even within a single line,
within a single range of glyphs,
because they can be reordered,
you may end up with multiple rects
that you need to represent them.
NSLayout Manager provides
information about insertion points,
potential insertion points in the text,
and it can go the other direction.
If you're given a location in the layout,
it can go back and determine
what glyph that corresponds to.
Or if you're given a rect in the layout,
it can go back and determine the
glyph range that it encompasses.
So here is a brief example of
how we might have used that if
we wanted to measure the width
of certain pieces of text.
In this case, we have a text view,
suppose, and from the text view,
we get the layout manager
and the text container.
And then if we've determined a particular
range of text that we want the width for,
then we can go through and call
this method rect array for character
range and so forth and so forth.
And it returns a C array of rect.
And then, as I said,
there may be multiple rects
even needed to represent one
contiguous range in the text.
So we go through and add up the widths
of all these rects to get the total
width of this portion of the text.
So, points I want you to take away.
You should let the Cocoa framers
do as much as possible for you,
handling internationalization
and international issues.
And you need to avoid any of
the problematic assumptions,
things like assuming that a
single keystroke corresponds
to a single character,
or that a single character
corresponds to a single glyph,
or that the locale is
equivalent to the localization.
or that all the glyphs in a line
are ordered from left to right.
Use UniCode.
Use NSString as much as possible to
handle the heavy lifting for you.
Use the date and number formatters
for user-visible dates and numbers,
and use the 10.4 behavior for these.